Add X.509 + Attestation variants (#2)
yaronf/draft-tls-attestation: draft-fossati-tls-attestation.md

  I-D.ietf-rats-architecture:
  TLS-Ext-Registry: IANA.tls-extensiontype-values
  TLS-Param-Registry: IANA.tls-parameters
  I-D.acme-device-attest:
  RA-TLS:
    target: https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.05863
    title: Integrating Remote Attestation with Transport Layer Security
    author:
       -
        ins: T. Knauth
        name: Thomas Knauth
       -
        ins: M. Steiner
        name: Michael Steiner
       -
        ins: S. Chakrabarti
        name: Somnath Chakrabarti
       -
        ins: L. Lei
        name: Li Lei
       -
        ins: C. Xing
        name: Cedric Xing
       -
        ins: M. Vij
        name: Mona Vij
    date: January 2018

>   DICE-Attestation:
>     target: https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/resource/dice-attestation-architecture/
>     title: DICE Attestation Architecture Version 1.00 Revision 0.23
>     author:
>       -
>         org: Trusted Computing Group
>     date: March 2021

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  DICE-Layering:
    target: https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/resource/dice-layering-architecture/
    title: DICE Layering Architecture Version 1.00 Revision 0.19
    author:
      -
        org: Trusted Computing Group
    date: July 2020
```

--- back

# X.509 and Attestation usage variants

The inclusion of attestation results and evidence as part of the TLS
handshake offers the relying party information about the state of the
workload and its cryptographic keys, but lacks the means to specify a
stable identity to the workload in question. While the end-to-end system
could solve this problem by including an identity as part of the
attestation results, some use-cases require the use of traditional PKI
mechanisms for this. It is therefore important to consider the possible
approaches for combining regular X.509 certificates and attestation within
one handshake.

1. X.509 certificates only: no attestation metadata is carried across,

>    authentication relies on PKI alone - regular TLS with X.509 certificates

Author: > the RA verified that the key has been generated within a confidential environment

Do you mean the CA instead of RA?

>    authentication relies on PKI alone - regular TLS with X.509 certificates

Reviewer 2: @thomas-fossati Is the policy you're thinking of machine readable? Otherwise I don't see how it can be used. And if machine readable, that would probably be a certificate extension.

>    authentication relies on PKI alone - regular TLS with X.509 certificates

Reviewer: Yaron, sorry, I lost the notification for this... very belated reply below:

> Is the policy you're thinking of machine readable? Otherwise I don't see how it can be used. And if machine readable, that would probably be a certificate extension.

Yes, it's machine readable -- it'd be the policy OID in the policy cert extension.

>    authentication relies on PKI alone - regular TLS with X.509 certificates

Author: I get the feeling that this conversation and the one about the cert resulting from ACME device attest are actually the same thing.

>    authentication relies on PKI alone - regular TLS with X.509 certificates

Reviewer 2: Yes, and they both belong in item #2 of the list: certificates with extra "stuff".

>    authentication relies on PKI alone - regular TLS with X.509 certificates

Reviewer: > If an OID already exists with this exact semantics, let's have a reference to it.

I don't think there's one.  Each would CA define theirs.

> Otherwise, I don't think this is the right place to discuss it - item #1 on the list is plain old X.509 certificates, with no extra magic.

I'd say RFC3280's cert policies extension is well within "plain old" X.509.

>    authentication relies on PKI alone - regular TLS with X.509 certificates

Reviewer: > Yes, and they both belong in item #2 of the list: certificates with extra "stuff".

it looks like we could make some sub-categories in the "extra stuff" bucket:

* custom extension
  * added to the EE cert (RA-TLS)
  * added to the CA certs chain (DICE)
* explicit using existing signalling, e.g. via policy OID in the EE cert (Carl's RedHat example)
* implicit signal, e.g., via issuer name

>    authentication relies on PKI alone - regular TLS with X.509 certificates

Author: Ok, I've expanded that list, don't know if the extra nesting will become fugly when rendered.

Let me know what you think - maybe I should make the title of that subsection about using X.509 extensions more verbose 🤔

2. X.509 certificates containing attestation extension: the certificates in
   the Certificate message carry some sort of attestation metadata in
   extensions
  * since this draft is primarily concerned with attestation as first-class
    credentials, this variant is not covered by our work
  * within this approach there are a few potential cases with different
    syntax and semantics: 
    * Self-signed certificate with attestation evidence in an extension

>     (e.g., RA-TLS): the device acts as a CA for its own certificates,

Reviewer 2: Reference.

    including the attestation evidence within a certificate extension
    * CA-signed certificate with limited attestation results in an

>     extension (e.g., ACME Device Attestation): remote attestation is

Reviewer 2: Please add a reference to the ACME doc.

>     extension (e.g., ACME Device Attestation): remote attestation is

Author: Yeah, I was thinking of the result of using the ACME device attest flow, where you get something resembling a rough attestation result baked into the certificate

>     extension (e.g., ACME Device Attestation): remote attestation is

Reviewer: ok, got it.  rather than "limited" maybe "proxy for"?

>     extension (e.g., ACME Device Attestation): remote attestation is

Author: Been changed, please check if it sounds better now!

    performed between the CA and attester prior to issuance, after which
    the CA adds an extension indicating that the certificate key has
    fulfilled some verification policy

>     * The DICE specification defines certificates that include attestation

Reviewer 2: Reference again.

>     * The DICE specification defines certificates that include attestation

Author: Do you mean this bit should be removed, as it's not exactly an attestation per se that is carried in the cert?

>     * The DICE specification defines certificates that include attestation

Reviewer: it's not super clear what the recommendation DICE makes for use in TLS is.  Maybe there is something buried somewhere in some TCG doc that says so, but I've never been able to find it.  The thing though is that the DICE "internal" CA can in principle issue EE certs that the device can use in TLS.  And the cert chain associated to such device contains the attestation for the whole device (stashed in TCB-info extensions along the chain).

>     * The DICE specification defines certificates that include attestation

Reviewer: the change in c6aec9d looks good to me.

>     * The DICE specification defines certificates that include attestation

Reviewer 2: I disagree. I think the original text is correct and needed. Thomas is saying that the validation for DICE certificate chains is not specified anywhere. Our document, and certainly this section, is not the right place to speculate on how to do TLS with DICE.
> At the time of writing, it is not clear whether and how these certificates can be used within TLS.

    information. At the time of writing, it is not clear whether and how
    these certificates can be used within TLS.
3. X.509 certificates alongside PAT: a keypair with a corresponding
   certificate already exists and the owner wishes to continue using it,
   while also enhancing the handshake to provide verifiable metadata
   regarding the platform running the workload
  * no cryptographic linking is used between certificate and PAT
  * this approach is currently not addressed in this document
4. X.509 certificates alongside PAT and KAT: similar to (3), with the
   addition of key attestation meant to offer verifiable metadata regarding
   the key identified by the certificate
  * this implies that the TLS identity key must have been generated and
    stored securely by an attested platform
  * unlike (3), the certificate, KAT, and PAT must be cryptographically
    linked together
  * this approach is currently not addressed in this document
5. Combined PAT/KAT: one attestation token carries metadata pertaining to
   both platform and key, without explicit support from the attester for a

>    standard TLS identity

Reviewer 2: Maybe say more explicitly that there's no certificate in this option.

  * this approach is currently not addressed in this document
6. PAT alongside KAT: identical to (5), apart from the fact that the key
   and platform attestations are separate tokens, cryptographically linked
   together
  * this approach is discussed in this document as the Combined Attestation

>     Bundle

Reviewer 2: I'm not seeing the word "bindle" used in the document.

Author: Yes, my fault - I was reading an old version of the draft while writing this up

handshake offers the relying party information about the state of the
system and its cryptographic keys, but lacks the means to specify a stable
endpoint identifier. While it is possible to solve this problem by
including an identifier as part of the attestation result, some use cases
require the use of a public key infrastructure (PKI). It is therefore
important to consider the possible approaches for conveying X.509
certificates and attestation within a single handshake.

In general, the following combinations of X.509 and attestation usage are
possible:

1. X.509 certificates only: In this case no attestation is exchanged in the
    TLS handshake. Authentication relies on PKI alone, i.e. TLS with X.509
    certificates.
2. X.509 certificates containing attestation extension: The X.509
    certificates in the Certificate message carry attestation as part of
    the X.509 certificate extensions. Several proposals exist that enable
    this functionality: 
    * Custom X.509 extension:
      * Attester-issued certificates (e.g., RA-TLS {{RA-TLS}}): The
      attester acts as a certification authority (CA) and includes the
      attestation evidence within an X.509 extension.

>       * The DICE specification {{DICE-Attestation}} defines certificates
>       that include attestation information in the CA chain of certificates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      * DICE defines extensions that include attestation information in
      the "Embedded CA" certificates (See Section 8.1.1.1 of {{DICE-Layering}}).
```

    include attestation information.
3. X.509 certificates alongside a PAT: This use case assumees that a
    keypair with a corresponding certificate already exists and that the
    owner wishes to continue using it. As a consequence, there is no
    cryptographic linkage between the certificate and the PAT. This
    approach is currently not supported by this specification.
4. X.509 certificates alongside the PAT and KAT: The addition of key
    attestation implies that the TLS identity key must have been generated
    and stored securely by the attested platform. Unlike in variant (3),
    the certificate, the KAT, and the PAT must be cryptographically linked.
    This variant is currently not addressed in this document.
5. Combined PAT/KAT: With this variant the attestation token carries
    information pertaining to both platform and key. No X.509 certificate
    is transmitted during the handshake. This approach is currently not
    addressed in this document.
6. PAT alongside KAT: This variant is similar to (5) with the exception
    that the key and the platform attestations are stored in separate
    tokens, cryptographically linked together. This approach is covered by

>     this document as detailed in {{I-D.bft-rats-kat}}.

Reviewer 2: This document mentions draft-bft-rats-kat as one possible example. So for consistency, I would say:
> This approach is covered by this document. A possible instantiation of the KAT is described in {{I-D.bft-rats-kat}}.
